Import iOS and Android documentation (#244)
elastic/opentelemetry: docs/reference/edot-sdks/android/index.md

---
navigation_title: EDOT Android
description: The Elastic Distribution of OpenTelemetry Android (EDOT Android) is an APM agent based on OpenTelemetry. It provides built-in tools and configurations to make the OpenTelemetry SDK work with Elastic using as little code as possible while fully leveraging the combined forces of Elasticsearch and Kibana for your Android application.
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
    observability:
products:
  - id: cloud-serverless
  - id: observability
  - id: edot-sdk
mapped_pages:
  - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/android/current/intro.html
  - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/android/current/index.html
---

# Elastic Distribution of OpenTelemetry Android

The Elastic Distribution of OpenTelemetry Android (EDOT Android) is an APM agent based on [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/). EDOT Android provides built-in tools and configurations to make the [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/) work with your {{stack}} using as little code as possible.

> All the features provided by the [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java) are available for you to use and are pre-configured by the agent to work properly out of the box. This allows you to fulfill various use cases to better understand your app's performance.

Author: Good point.

## Distributed tracing

> Distributed tracing allows you to see the full picture of how long your application has to wait for your backend services to provide a response, and why, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distributed tracing allows you to see the full picture of **how long your application has to wait for your backend services** to provide a response, and why, as shown in the following example:
```

This is worth emphasizing, as it's a common issue in android app development that doesn't have many solutions without using APM tools. So it's an important selling point.

Author: We don't really use bold for emphasis if we can avoid it.

:::{image} images/intro/distributed-tracing.png

> :alt: Distributed tracing

Reviewer: At the beginning, these images were added as [screenshots](https://elastic.github.io/docs-builder/syntax/images/#screenshots) but were later changed to regular ones because I think there were some rendering issues or something like that (@colleenmcginnis should know the details). In any case, I was wondering if we could use screenshots now?

Author: Recovering :screenshot:

:::

The previous image shows three spans from {{kib}}:

- The first span is created in your application to track an HTTP request to your backend service.
- The second span is created within your backend service and shows how long it took to receive the client request and provide a response.
- The last span is also created within your backend service when it queries other resources internally. In this case, it makes an HTTP request to another service, but in other cases, it could involve querying a database.

You can select any of the spans to view their full details if you need more contextual information from each.

:::{note}
For distributed tracing to work properly, configure your backend services to send telemetry to the {{stack}} as well.
:::

## Session review

> The SDK attaches session information to each span and log generated from your application. This allows you to create queries that group all the telemetry that belongs to a session and form a session event timeline. This is useful to identify the most common actions performed by your users, as well as tracing the steps leading up to errors they might encounter.

Reviewer: I think the example mentioned in the [original text](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/apm/agents/android#session-review) is helpful to get a clearer idea of a session, which is quite a new/wip topic, at least in OTel. It also introuces beginner users to other Elastic tools such as [Kibana's Discover](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/discover).

Historically, Elastic's tools have been targeted towards backend services, so most likely a lot of android devs either don't know about it or have heard the "backend devs" talk about it but haven't used it themselves, which is why it's helpful to take opportunities like the session example to introduce android devs to Elastic in general.

> ## Alerts and dashboards

Reviewer: I'd leave the original title "More" instead and would also add the extra bullet point that sends users to discover the rest of Elastic's tools. This is due to what I mentioned earlier about android devs most likely not being familiar with Elastic in general.

### Disk buffering

Your application's telemetry data is stored locally before being sent to the {{stack}}. Then it's removed either after being successfully exported or to make room for new telemetry data if needed. This minimizes the risk of data loss due to internet connectivity issues.

### Real time

For [distributed tracing](#distributed-tracing) to work properly, your application's time should be in sync with the [coordinated universal time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_Universal_Time). This is sometimes an issue for Android applications, as the time provided by the OS is often not accurate enough. The SDK aims to synchronize telemetry timestamps with the universal time to ensure a reliable view of event timelines.

### Sessions

A session groups telemetry data within a time frame when your application is active by adding a `session.id` attribute to all the spans and logs that come out of your application. This helps limit the volume of data you need to look at when investigating the steps that led to an error within your app. It can also give you insight into the common actions performed on each use.

> A session is created when no previous session exists or when the previous one has expired. Sessions expire after 30 minutes of inactivity. You can extend this for up to 4 hours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A session is created when no previous session exists or when the previous one has expired. Sessions expire after 30 minutes of inactivity. This will be extended to up to 4 hours when there's no inactivity.
```

Reviewer: Users can't currently manually extend it, as it's suggested in the text. It will get extended automatically when there's always telemetry being generated without an idle time of 30 min.

### Dynamic configuration

> The SDK allows you to modify some values after the initialization has finished. Refer to [configuration](configuration.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK allows you to modify some values after the initialization has finished. Refer to [configuration](configuration.md) for more details.
```

Reviewer: It seemed to me like it ended too soon.

### Automatic instrumentation

> The SDK provides extensions that automatically generate telemetry for common tools and use cases. Refer to [Automatic Instrumentation](automatic-instrumentation.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK provides extensions that automatically generate telemetry for common tools and use cases. Refer to [Automatic Instrumentation](automatic-instrumentation.md) for more details.
```
